---
author: Adam Miller
title: X-Ray Specs: Can Language Enhance Perception? 
updated: 2016-11-30 
tags: [cinema, language, philosophy]
---

<span class="dropFont">I saw [*Arrival*](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2543164/)</span> with some friends the other day. We enjoyed the film--let's get that out of the way. The Lawrence, KS Regal Theater, whose carpet can only be described in the Lovecraftian fashion of murky un-words and grim warnings, had deemed it a sound business decision to install fully reclining black La-Z-Boys&trade;. Suffice it to say we stayed for the credits, and discussion ensued. 

The film explores the problem of translation by imagining a scenario in which humans, working under intense time pressure, must translate an alien language to determine whether the aliens mean to attack or help us. 

**Spoiler Alert**

The protagonist/translator, Louise Banks (Ami Adams), cracks the language, which she realizes occurs without respect for linear time, as the aliens ("Heptapods"), can perceive the future and past and so view all events as concurrent. Once Banks cracks the language, she comes to view the world like the aliens. Our discussion centered on Banks' transformation, and more broadly, the extent to which the lens of language affects how we perceive and our ability to perceive. 

**End Spoiler**

Though our discussion felt revolutionary at the time (high as we were on the fumes of popcorn butterine), we were not the first to wonder whether humans are slaves to their grammar. Linguist Benjamin Lee Whorf introduced [Linguist Relativity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity), which argues that language shapes our perception to a profound extent. "Strong Whorfianism," as it's sometimes called, argues (among other things), that certain concepts cannot be translated between cultures, at least not without fully understanding their language. Counterintuitively, *Arrival* represents the strong Whorfian view (with the caveat that the film deals with inter-species translation), in that the Heptapods' conception of time cannot be expressed without the aid of their language&#8212;it is not translatable, even loosely. 

Linguists and anthropologists have reported scenarios comparable to the Heptapod scenario when attempting translation between cultures. Recently, scientists have claimed that ancient man could not discern the color blue, lacking the word for it. You can find a [write-up](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2976405/Could-ancestors-blue-Ancient-civilisations-didn-t-perceive-colour-didn-t-word-say-scientists.html) of that discovery here, along with an image that illustrates our inability to perceive a color easily perceived by the Himba tribe of Namibia. Without a doubt, certain cultures are more attuned to their environments than outsiders. A man who fishes for his supper will notice patterns in the water, be able to distinguish species of fish, etc. to a degree that a desert nomad would not. But all this begs the question of whether language itself impacts perception, or merely follows from it. 

I am suspicious of the Whorfian view. While a culture may better distinguish between certain colors&#8212;and accordingly have the vocabulary to express these distinctions&#8212;*holding we have identical sensory apparatuses*, I see no reason why any *concept* shouldn't be translatable. Note I say concept; of course the *poetry* and *efficiency* of a language is lost in translation. This is why English speakers, for example, so willingly adopt foreign words. We don't have an elegant substitute for *schadenfreude*, the best we can do being the dictionary definition: "delighting in the suffering of another." But we can certainly understand the concept, because like the German speakers of the world, the English speakers, too, can be assholes. 

That said, the notion that learning a new language can somehow "unlock" a new part of your brain is intriguing. It isn't entirely implausible either, insofar as we don't fully understand our brains and bodies and what all they're capable of, even if there's nothing to suggest that a particular syntax or vocabulary can somehow allow you to do or sense something you couldn't previously. I'm readier to adopt the position that language helps us clarify and sort our perceptions&#8212;that it can codify experience, and in turn color and shape future experience. Language does not merely represent nature, but is a thing in nature that can generate fresh understanding and experience. Being a writer and composition instructor has showed me the power of the written word to generate and refine thoughts. So there is definitely a two-way relationship between language and our capacities and experiences outside of language. If nothing else, language allows us to perceive language. Conversely, if my ears can't pick up a certain pitch or my eyes can't perceive a certain color, this is primarily a problem of my biology which cannot be surmounted with words. 

I don't mean to be a buzz kill. Back to *Arrival*, there's nothing to say that we're only waiting for someone to articulate the intricacies. 

